
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# Mapping the Evidence Gaps for Stroke in Lower-Middle Income Countries (LMIC) and Low Income Countries (LIC) - Ollama workflow

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

This repository is a template for a
[`docker`](https://www.docker.com/get-started)-containerised,
[`{targets}`](https://docs.ropensci.org/targets/)-based,
[`{renv}`](https://rstudio.github.io/renv/articles/renv.html)-enabled
[`R`](https://cran.r-project.org/) workflow for mapping the evidence
gaps for stroke in lower-middle income countries (LMICs) and low income
countries (LICs) using open source large language models (LLMs) provided
via [Ollama](https://ollama.com/).

## About the Project

The burden of stroke is among the top five causes of mortality and
morbidity in low-middle income countries (LMICs) and low income
countries (LICs) and this burden is growing, yet evidence on
contributing causes and the efficacy of interventions appears to be
disproportionately generated in high-income settings for discrete
population groups. This review maps existing evidence drawing on LMIC
and LIC populations.

## Repository Structure

The project repository is structured as follows:

    stroke-lmic-ollama
        |-- .github/
        |-- data/
        |-- data-raw/
        |-- outputs/
        |-- R/
        |-- reports
        |-- renv
        |-- renv.lock
        |-- .Rprofile
        |-- packages.R
        |-- _targets.R

- `.github` contains project testing and automated deployment of outputs
  workflows via continuous integration and continuous deployment (CI/CD)
  using Github Actions.

- `data/` contains intermediate and final data outputs produced by the
  workflow.

- `data-raw/` contains raw datasets, usually either downloaded from
  source or added manually, that are used in the project.

- `outputs/` contains compiled reports and figures produced by the
  workflow.

- `R/` contains functions developed/created specifically for use in this
  workflow.

- `reports/` contains literate code for R Markdown and/or Quarto reports
  rendered in the workflow.

- `renv/` contains `renv` package specific files and directories used by
  the package for maintaining R package dependencies within the project.
  The directory `renv/library`, is a library that contains all packages
  currently used by the project. This directory, and all files and
  sub-directories within it, are all generated and managed by the `renv`
  package. Users should not change/edit these manually.

- `renv.lock` file is the `renv` lockfile which records enough metadata
  about every package used in this project that it can be re-installed
  on a new machine. This file is generated by the `renv` package and
  should not be changed/edited manually.

- `.Rprofile` file is a project R profile generated when initiating
  `renv` for the first time. This file is run automatically every time R
  is run within this project, and `renv` uses it to configure the R
  session to use the `renv` project library.

- `packages.R` file lists out all R package dependencies required by the
  workflow.

- `_targets.R` file defines the steps in the workflow’s data ingest,
  data processing, data analysis, and reporting pipeline.

## Reproducibility

### System dependencies

This project requires the following system dependencies:

- `poppler`

This project depends on the
[`{pdftools}`](https://poppler.freedesktop.org/) package which requires
the `poppler` PDF rendering library to be installed first. For macOS and
Windows users, installation of `{pdftools}` via the binary packages
available from CRAN will deal with this requirement automatically.
However, for Linux users, the `poppler` library will need to be
installed first in order to be able to install `{pdftools}` from source.
Installation of the `poppler` library for Linux is described
[here](https://docs.ropensci.org/pdftools/#installation).

- `quarto`

This project uses the [`quarto`](https://quarto.org/) open-source
scientific and technical publishing system. Instructions on how to
download and install `quarto` can be found
[here](https://quarto.org/docs/get-started/).

- `ollama`

This project uses `ollama` to serve open large language modles (LLM)
locally. Instructions on how to download and install `ollama` can be
found [here](https://ollama.com/download). This project specifically
uses the open source `DeepSeek-R1` model. Once `ollama` is installed,
pull one of the `DeepSeek-R1` models that fits into your local machine.
The workflow has been developed and implemented using the
`deepseek-r1:671b` model which requires about 404GB of random access
memory (RAM). We would recommend using the same model where possible or
if your machine has enough memory resources.

### R version

This project is built using `R 4.6.0`. To manage R versions, it is
recommended to use [`rig`](https://github.com/r-lib/rig) - an R
installation manager - to be able to install multiple versions of R and
switch between them as needed.

### R package dependencies

This project uses the `{renv}` framework to record R package
dependencies and versions. Packages and versions used are recorded in
`renv.lock` and code used to manage dependencies is in the `renv`
directory and other files in the root project directory.

On starting an R session in the working directory of this repository,
first run

``` r
renv::restore()
```

to install R package dependencies. This is only done once when the
project is being initiated for the first time by a user.

### The workflow

The current workflow has the following steps:

Warning: program compiled against libxml 213 using older 209

``` mermaid
graph LR
  style Graph fill:#FFFFFF00,stroke:#000000;
  subgraph Graph
    direction LR
    xb4a9c9edd73bec9b(["retraction_watch_data_download_csv_file"]):::skipped --> x71f5d31f85b83ceb(["retraction_watch_data"]):::skipped
    xe03e263fab696ab7(["retraction_watch_data_url"]):::skipped --> xb4a9c9edd73bec9b(["retraction_watch_data_download_csv_file"]):::skipped
    x188aa7ffce88bb98(["ris_file_paths"]):::skipped --> x6ba4c23c2738dda8["ris_all"]:::skipped
    x6ba4c23c2738dda8["ris_all"]:::skipped --> x4b7fcdd63fd7fb9a(["ris_all_file"]):::skipped
    x971c8918645ea4f3(["search_abstract"]):::completed --> xf493b7d472ff5e59(["screening_prompt"]):::completed
    x4946600ed43ea69a(["search_title"]):::completed --> xf493b7d472ff5e59(["screening_prompt"]):::completed
    xcf6ddd66dde32d43(["search_full_processed"]):::completed --> x971c8918645ea4f3(["search_abstract"]):::completed
    x2f7fdb4e976b16f9(["search_full_raw"]):::skipped --> x2b5a5c97911afa83(["search_full_deduplicated"]):::skipped
    x71f5d31f85b83ceb(["retraction_watch_data"]):::skipped --> xe0f5c577fdbd2edb(["search_full_no_retractions"]):::skipped
    x2b5a5c97911afa83(["search_full_deduplicated"]):::skipped --> xe0f5c577fdbd2edb(["search_full_no_retractions"]):::skipped
    xe0f5c577fdbd2edb(["search_full_no_retractions"]):::skipped --> xcf6ddd66dde32d43(["search_full_processed"]):::completed
    xcf6ddd66dde32d43(["search_full_processed"]):::completed --> xd596227685e2e430(["search_full_processed_flattened"]):::completed
    xd596227685e2e430(["search_full_processed_flattened"]):::completed --> x4b455536a354b302(["search_full_processed_flattened_csv"]):::completed
    x4b7fcdd63fd7fb9a(["ris_all_file"]):::skipped --> x2f7fdb4e976b16f9(["search_full_raw"]):::skipped
    x188aa7ffce88bb98(["ris_file_paths"]):::skipped --> xfda738880e222baf["search_full_ris"]:::skipped
    xcf6ddd66dde32d43(["search_full_processed"]):::completed --> x4946600ed43ea69a(["search_title"]):::completed
    x60ed8e986a8cab2a(["screening_context_prompt"]):::skipped
  end
```

To run the workflow, issue the following command in R from within the
project directory

``` r
targets::tar_make()
```

or issue the following command in Terminal from within the project
directory

``` bash
Rscript -e  "targets::tar_make()"
```
